---
layout: post
title: C++ Can't Abandon Raw Pointers
comments: true
---

> *...yet*

This post was born from [a Reddit thread regarding `observer_ptr`](https://www.reddit.com/r/cpp/comments/808c5z/bikeshedding_time_poll_for_a_new_name_for/).

For those unfamiliar, `observer_ptr` is the "dumb" smart pointer. It simply
provides some of the semantics of a `T*` in a class type.

> *Why would I want a class to wrap `T*` when I can just use `T*`?*

Here's a few good reasons to use an `observer_ptr`:

1.  `observer_ptr<T>` captures your *intent*, just like `unique_ptr`,
    `shared_ptr` and `T&`. In this case, your *intent* is to have a non-owning
    reference to an object.
1.  `observer_ptr<T>` can be instrumented with runtime debug checks if you try
    to use it in an invalid manner. This alone is my favorite reason.
1.  `observer_ptr<T>` does not provide `operator[]` nor arithmetic.

The thread in question was regarding the *name* "`observer_ptr`". The name
doesn't quite roll off the tough, and it may cause
confusion with concepts like the [observer pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_pattern), to which it
is unrelated.

I like the idea of `observer_ptr`. I hope the proposal goes through, but I'd
like to address an orthogonal issue and suggest a completely new
pointer/reference type that I haven't seen yet:

    optional_ref<T>

Or maybe just

    opt_ref<T>

It will fill some gaps we have in our reference/pointer toolbox.

## Why Do We Keep Using `T*`?

Some modern C++ evangelists say "Never use raw pointers!" Other evangelists
admit that they have a valid purpose and instead limit themselves to "Never use
raw `new` or `delete`."

I'm split between the two camps. I'd rather see the `T*` syntax be relegated to
low-level libraries and never used again, but I admit it still has valid use
cases with no good alternatives.

## Why `T*` Is Evil

A huge problem with raw pointers is *overloaded semantics*. A raw pointer `T*`
may be used as:

1. A reference to a `T`
2. A reference to a `T` that can be "re-bound"
3. A reference to an array of `T`
4. A reference to an array of `T` that can be "re-bound"
5. An optional reference to a `T`
6. An optional reference to an array of `T`

This is a big problem with using `T*`.

> *especially in code that follows **certain** style guides mandating its use.
You know the one.*

Modern C++ provides us with the following alternatives for each use case of
`T*`, each with a distinct meaningful use case :

1. We have `T&` to represent non-nullable references. It's one of my favorite
   C++ features. Implicitly nullable references in other languages are complete
   insanity. It should be the first choice when choosing a reference type.

2. We have `std::reference_wrapper<T>`. It may be a mouthful and a lot to type,
   but where it really shines is when used in containers or as a data member of
   a class.

   Using a `T&` as a class member is a difficult. It prevents implementation of
   class assignment and effectively makes the class "immovable." Maybe this is
   what you want: Go for it.

   Using a `T&` in many containers simply doesn't work. Since many containers
   perform assignments internally, we reach the same issue as using `T&` as a
   data member.

   In old C++ we'd reach for `T*` to answer this problem, but now we have a
   better solution: `std::reference_wrapper<T>`. It has no default constructor,
   so one won't accidentally leave it "un-bound" like one might with a `T*`. It
   provides a never-null guarantee like a real `T&`, and it automatically
   converts to and from a `T&`, so passing and returning it as a `T&` is
   completely invisible and unsurprising.

   The only downside is that you can't use the regular `.` operator to get at
   the members of `T`. You need to call `.get()` or bind it to a real `T&`. Not
   a big problem for the upsides, in my opinion. Maybe someday we can overload
   `operator.` too.

3. For references to contiguous sequences, we have a few alternatives, the only
   standard one being iterator pairs. Using iterator pairs is great if you want
   to support non-contiguous ranges with no performance penalty on contiguous
   ones.

   Soon, we'll also have *Ranges*, which are even better.

   For contiguous sequences, let's hope for `span<T>` or `array_view<T>`.

4. Iterators pairs and `span<T>`/`array_view<T>` solve the rebinding problem
   nicely. Nothing more to say.

5. All we have today is `T*` or... *shudder*
   `std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<T>>`. This is where an
   `optional_ref<T>` could save the day.

6. Optional arrays can be conveyed with `std::optional` of another type.

We're really missing two big cases: (4) and (5).

(4) is solved by `gsl::span`, and will hopefully have a standard counterpart
in the future.

(5) has an ugly solution: `std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<T>>`. Can't
want.

## A Brief and Horribly Incomplete History Lesson on `std::optional<T>`

`std::optional<T>` is one of my favorite library additions *ever*. In technical
terms, it creates a type with the domain of all `T` values plus a null `T`
value. Even if `T` is conceptually infinite (like `std::string`, where there
are infinite possible values), we can construct a value outside the domain of
`T`, which we represent in code with `std::nullopt`.

It's a way to say "Maybe there's a `T`. Or there's this sentinel 'null' value".

Before `std::optional` was `std::optional`, it was `boost::optional`. It had
very similar semantics, with a two notable differences:

- `std::nullopt` is `boost::none`.
- `boost::optional` supports references. (!!!)

### Why did `std::optional` drop support for reference type parameters?

The problem with having a `std::optional<T&>` boils down to code like this:

```c++
int a = 1729;
int b = 42;
std::optional<int&> int_ref = a;
int_ref = b;
cout << a;  // <-- What should this print?
```

There are two semantics that might be taken here:

1. `int_ref = b` *re-binds* the reference of `int_ref` to refer to `b`.
1. `int_ref = b` *assigns through* to `a`.

In case (1), the value of `a` is unaffected by the assignment, so it prints
`1729`. In case (2), the value of `b` is assigned to `a`, and we print `42`.

`boost::optional` takes the first route and *re-binds* the reference.

> As an aside, I used to ardently believe that case (1) is *the only sensible
  behavior to expect.* Even while writing this post, I found [an insightful
  comment from Tony van Eerd](https://www.reddit.com/r/cpp/comments/53m612/the_case_for_optional_references/d7uz6k9/)
  on the exact topic. Even though behavior (2) is *possible* to
  occur, I'd be extremely surprised to see it ever happen should
  `std::optional<T>` have been given valid behavior for reference types. I
  still think `std::optional<T&>` should have gone through with rebind
  semantics, but what's done is done.

This reference-binding confusion (along with some concerns about total ordering
of `std::optional`) was a big hold-up that prevented us from getting
`std::optional` in C++14 as originally hoped.

## What about `std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<T>>`?

A few things:

- `operator*` and `operator->` on `std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<T>>`
  return a `std::reference_wrapper<T>`, not a `T&`. If you're immediately
  passing the object as a parameter this isn't a problem, but it makes usage
  code ugly with calls to `.get()` everywhere.
- it has more overhead than a raw pointer `T*` (without some standard-library
  trickery). `std::reference_wrapper<T>` can be implemented using a simple raw
  pointer, and the simplest `std::optional<T>` implementation consumes an
  `std::aligned_storage<T>` plus a `bool` to represent the state. A smart
  standard library could detect the `reference_wrapper` parameter and instead
  use a regular pointer with `nullptr` being the "dis-engaged" state.
- It's *so much typing*, and we're lazy.

And worst of all:

**It's not constructible from a `T&&`**.

This is an intentional design of `std::reference_wrapper`, to prevent this code:

```c++
std::reference_wrapper<const std::string> my_str = std::string("Hello!");
// my_str now points into the void
```

Unfortunately, that also prevents this code from working:

```c++
void lang_ref(const MyClass&);
void lib_ref(std::reference_wrapper<const MyClass>);

void bar() {
    lang_ref(MyClass{}); // <-- Okay
    lib_ref(MyClass{});  // <-- ERROR!
}
```

The `reference_wrapper<const MyClass>` parameter will not bind to a `MyClass&&`
in the above example. This isn't usually a problem because using
`std::reference_wrapper<T>` as a function parameter is rarely what you actually
want.

Because of this prohibition on r-values for `reference_wrapper` binding, we
similarly can't do this:

```c++
void with_optional_ref(std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<const MyClass>>)

void bar() {
    with_optional_ref(MyClass{});
}
```

`optional<T>` is only convertible from a `U` if `U` is implicitly convertible
to `T`. For a `U` of `MyClass&&` and a `T` of `reference_wrapper<const MyClass>`,
this convertibility is not allowed, so the `U` cannot convert to `optional<T>`.
Dang.

## An Alternative: `opt_ref<T>`

An *extremely* primitive implementation of an "optional reference" type might
look like this:

```c++
template <typename T>
class opt_ref {
    T* _ptr = nullptr;

public:
    opt_ref() noexcept = default;
    opt_ref(T& reference) noexcept
        : _ptr(std::addressof(reference)) {}
    opt_ref(std::nullopt_t) noexcept
        : _ptr(nullptr) {}

    explicit operator bool() const noexcept { return _ptr != nullptr; }

    T& operator*() noexcept {
        assert(_ptr != nullptr && "Dereferencing null opt_ref");
        return *_ptr;
    }

    T* operator->() noexcept {
        assert(_ptr != nullptr && "Dereferencing null opt_ref");
        return _ptr;
    }
};
```

Here I've chosen the name `opt_ref` for brevity, and because I think it suffices
to explain its purpose.

This definition affords a few niceties over both `optional<reference_wrapper<T>>`
and `T*` as an "optional reference" type.

Over `optional<reference_wrapper<T>>`:

- It's convertible from a `T&&` for the case of `opt_ref<const T>`. This can be
  dangerous if misused, but that's what C++ is, right?
- The `operator*` and `operator->` both return the underlying `T&`. Nice.
- The same size overhead as a `T*`.
- It's less to type. A lot less.

Over `T*`:

- None of the overloaded semantics. It is clear in what it represents.
- It will bind to plain expressions. No need to invoke `operator&` or
  `std::addressof`.
- We can put debug assertions on it's `operator*` and `operator->`.

## "Why Should I Care?"

It's may be difficult to see utility in such a tiny class template. It doesn't
solve a huge swath of problems we face. It doesn't fundamentally change the way
one write's code. It's just a silly wrapper around a pointer.

But that's the thing: *Everything* is just a wrapper around pointers. Some are
just bigger than others. `std::vector`? Just a wrapper around some pointers.
`std::unique_ptr`? Just a wrapper around a pointer. `std::reference_wrapper`?
Just a wrapper of a pointer.

C++ is about building *abstractions*. The abstractions lead to better
*applications*. After all, libraries are *useless* until they end up as part of
an application.

Libraries like Jonathan Müller's [`output_parameter<T>`](http://foonathan.net/blog/2016/10/26/output-parameter.html)
and [`type_safe` library](http://foonathan.net/doc/type_safe/), Niall Douglas's
[Outcome](https://github.com/ned14/outcome) (hopefully someday `std::expected`),
or `std::chrono` are the real bread and butter of C++. These aren't enormous
all-encompassing frameworks that implement half the universe. They're just
little libraries that build upon lower-level primitives to reduce errors and
create expressive, meaningful code.

I won't claim `opt_ref` is anything as fantastic as the libraries I just
mentioned. It's a concept anyone could have easily come up with and implemented
in five minutes like I did.

It was a five minutes well spent. For the relevant project, I swapped out all
places using a `T*` and changed to `opt_ref<T>`. The payoff was fast, and I
could now have real optional reference parameters. It saved me time debugging as
well when I accidentally dereference them without checking and I see an
assertion fire exactly where the code hit, giving me a clear and meaningful
error message in my stderr output.

Finally, I ask: Why keep using pointers when we have better alternatives?
