---
layout: post
title: "Understanding C++ Modules: Part 1: Hello Modules, and Module Units"
comments: true
desc: In which I go over C++ Modules In-Depth - Module Units
---

My previous posts on modules have received a lot of attention. I'm happy that
I've been able to kick-start a lot of conversation, but I've also seen that a
large part of the community is still unclear on what modules *actually are.*

There is a lot of ground to cover. I can't do it all in one sitting, and I
doubt you'd want to read the entire thing in one go. I'll be breaking this up,
starting at the most high-level aspects and drilling down over time. I intend
these posts will clarify and discuss what modules *are*, what they can *do*,
and what they are *intended to do*, what they *cannot do*, and how they are
used.


# Using Modules

Here is a hello-world program using C++ Modules:

```c++
export module speech;

export const char* get_phrase() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}
```

```c++
// main.cpp
import speech;

import <iostream>;

int main() {
    std::cout << get_phrase() << '\n';
}
```

This is an extremely straightforward example. We have a single source file that
exposes a module `speech`. Our `main.cpp` `import`s `speech` and uses the
single function defined therein: `get_phrase`.

The effect of `import`ing a module is to make the exported entities declared
within that module to become *visible* by the importing translation unit. No
more. No less.

A few questions (which will be answered below): Why `export module` instead of
just `module`? How are modules named? What are the rules on `import`? What does
`export` do? What are these "partition" things people keep talking about?


## Module *Names*

A module is identified by the aptly named *module-name*. The following is the
grammar of *module-name*:

```py
module-name:
    [module-name-qualifier] identifier ;

module-name-qualifier:
    identifier "." |
    module-name-qualifier identifier "." ;
```

This means that a module's name is some non-zero number of identifiers joined
by a literal dot `.`. The identifier rules are the same as the rest of the
language, except that the identifiers `export` and `module` may not be used in a
module name, obviously.

What's the significance of the dot `.` ? Literally *nothing*. It's purely for
the benefit of you, the developer. A module named `boost.asio.async_completion`
makes it easier to understanding the logical hierarchy than a module named
`boost_asio_async_completion`, but there is no semantic difference between the
two naming styles according to the standard.

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
You may notice in `main.cpp` that we have an `import <iostream>;`, and
`<iostream>` does not follow the rules for a module name. What gives? The
answer is: `<iostream>` *is __not__ a module*: It is a *legacy header unit*.
This is an important topic, but we'll talk about those in a later post.
</div>


## A New C++ Source Entity

For all C++'s history, there has been one standard concept to encapsulate the
idea of a C++ source unit: The *translation unit*.

C++ Modules introduce a *new* type of translation unit called a *module unit*.
The definition is fairly simple:

> A *module unit* is a translation unit that contains a *module-declaration*.

What is a "module declaration"? We've already seen one in our example. The
grammar is very simple:

```py
module-declaration:
    ["export"] "module" module-name [module-partition] [attribute-specifier-seq] ";" ;

module-partition:
    ":" module-name ;
```

Basically, any file that contains a `module` line at the top level is a *module unit*. (The next section will cover the meaning of `module-partition`).

**Important subdivisions:** There are several different types of *module units*,
and it is important to understand the meaning of each of them:

- A *module **interface** unit* is a module unit where the *module-declaration*
  contains the `export` keyword. There can be any number of these in a module.
- A *module **implementation** unit* is any module unit that is not a module
  interface unit (Does not have the `export` keyword in the module-declaration).
- A *module **partition*** is a module unit where the *module-declaration*
  contains the *module-partition* component.
- A *module **interface partition*** is a module interface unit that is also a
  module partition (Contains both the `export` keyword and the
  `module-partition` component).
- A *module **implementation partition*** is a module implementation unit that
  is also a module partition. (Contains the `module-partition` component but no
  `export` keyword).
- The _**primary** module interface unit_ is the non-partition module unit that
  is also a module interface unit. There must be **exactly one** primary
  interface unit in a module. All other module interface units must be module
  partitions.

It isn't named explicitly, and it isn't entirely clear from the above reading,
but it is possible to have a module implementation unit that is not a
partition. A module-declaration without `export` and without a
`module-partition` label is a module implementation unit. There is no way to
import this module unit from another file, but it is useful to provide the
implementation of entities declared in different module units.


## Modules *Partitions*

Just like with C++ headers, there is no requirement that modules be split and
subdivided into multiple files. Nevertheless, large source files can become
intractable, so C++ modules also have a way to subdivide a single module into
distinct translation units that are merged together to form the total module.
These subdivisions are known as *partitions*.

Suppose we have two *enormous, cumbersome, and unwieldy* functions that we
don't want to include in the same module:

```c++
export module speech;

export const char* get_phrase_en() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}

export const char* get_phrase_es() {
    return "¡Hola Mundo!";
}
```

Whoa! That's a ton of code! Let's subdivide it using *partitions*:

```c++
// speech.cpp
export module speech;

export import :english;
export import :spanish;
```

```c++
// speech_english.cpp
export module speech:english;

export const char* get_phrase_en() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}
```

```c++
// speech_spanish.cpp
export module speech:spanish;

export const char* get_phrase_es() {
    return "¡Hola Mundo!";
}
```

```c++
// main.cpp
import speech;

import <iostream>;
import <cstdlib>;

int main() {
    if (std::rand() % 2) {
        std::cout << get_phrase_en() << '\n';
    } else {
        std::cout << get_phrase_es() << '\n';
    }
}
```

What's going on here?

- We have **one module** named `speech`
- Speech has **two partitions**: `english` and `spanish`
- The syntax `export module <module-name>:<part-name>` declares that the given
  module unit is a *module interface partition* belonging to `<module-name>`
  with the partition named by `<part-name>`.
- The syntax `import :<part-name>` (with a leading colon) imports the partition
  named by  `<part-name>`. The given `<part-name>` must belong to the importing
  module. Translation units that are not module units of a module `A` are not
  allowed to import partitions from `A`.
- The syntax `export import :<part-name>` makes the exported entities in the
  module partition visible as part of the module interface.

The name of a module partition follows the same rules as module names, except
`private` is not allowed.

When a user imports a module, then all entities described in all *module
interface units* for that module become visible in the importing file.
Remember: *module interface partitions* are *module interface units*.

The module unit that contains `export import <module-name>` (with no partition
name) is known as the **primary** *module interface unit.* There must be exactly
one *primary module interface unit*, but any number of *module interface
partitions*.

In the above example, `get_phrase_en` and `get_phrase_es` both live in the
`speech` module. The subdivision into partitions is not exposed to users.

The module interface is defined as the union of all module interface units
within that module.

We can classify the above source files as such:

- `speech.cpp` is the *primary module interface unit*.
- `speech_english.cpp` and `speech_spanish.cpp` are *module interface
  partitions*.
- `main.cpp` is a regular translation unit.

<div class="aside warning" markdown="1">
**IMPORTANT**: The *primary interface unit* for a module **must** export all of
the interface partitions for the module (either directly or indirectly) via
`export import :<part-name>`. Otherwise, the program is ill-formed, **no
diagnostic required**.
</div>


## "Submodules" are not a Thing (Technically)

Another way we could have subdivided the prior example might look like this:

```c++
// speech.cpp
export module speech;

export import speech.english;
export import speech.spanish;
```

```c++
// speech_english.cpp
export module speech.english;

export const char* get_phrase_en() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}
```

```c++
// speech_spanish.cpp
export module speech.spanish;

export const char* get_phrase_es() {
    return "¡Hola Mundo!";
}
```

```c++
// main.cpp
import speech;

import <iostream>;
import <cstdlib>;

int main() {
    if (std::rand() % 2) {
        std::cout << get_phrase_en() << '\n';
    } else {
        std::cout << get_phrase_es() << '\n';
    }
}
```

Instead of using partitions, we move the declarations of `get_phrase_en` and
`get_phrase_es` into their own modules, and the `speech` module
`export import`s them. The `export import <name>` syntax declares that users
who import the module will transitively import the module of the given name.

The content of `main.cpp` is unaffected between the two layouts. It
*implicitly* imports `speech.english` and `speech.spanish` by its import of
`speech`.

If you familiar with some other languages' module designs, it should be noted
that *this* is **not valid**:

```c++
// speech.cpp
export module speech;

// NOT OK:
export import .english;
export import .spanish;
```

Python users might be familiar with such syntax as a *qualified relative
import*, where the leading `.` tells the module mechanism to look for a sibling
module with the given name. C++ Modules do not work like this as their is no
intrinsic hierarchy. The compiler sees no relationship between modules `speech`,
`speech.english`, and `speech.spanish`. The above snippet is completely
nonsensical in the eyes of the language.

`speech.english` and `speech.spanish` *are not submodules* of `speech`. They
are completely disjoint modules.

So what's the deal? If both of these appear identical to downstream users, why
would you choose one over the other? The answer is, of course, tradeoffs:

*When using partitions*, every entity in the interface partitions is part of
the same module. **The module that owns an entity is intended to be part of
that entity's ABI!** This means that moving an entity from one module to
another is potentially **ABI breaking**. (It should be noted that this author
strongly discourages mixing and matching library versions in such a way that
this would be a problem, but that's another topic.)

*When using "submodules"*, you give users the ability to be more granular in
what they import. Despite the potential speed-up from modules, an
`import boost;` that imports the entirety of Boost could be deathly expensive
to compile times!


## Module *Implementation* Units

So far we've poked at module *interface* units, but there's another type of
module unit: The module *implementation* unit.

A *module implementation unit* is a module unit which does not have the
`export` keyword before the `module` keyword in its *module-declaration*. The
implementation units belong to a named module. Entities declared within an
implementation unit are visible *only* to the module of which they belong. This
has the advantage of keeping details out of users' hands, and has the possible
benefit of helping accelerate incremental builds as modification to the
implementation units does not effect downstream modules.

Here's what our example would look like if we use *implementation units*:

```c++
// speech.cpp
export module speech;

import :english;
import :spanish;

export const char* get_phrase_en();
export const char* get_phrase_es();
```

```c++
// speech_english.cpp
module speech:english;

const char* get_phrase_en() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}
```

```c++
// speech_spanish.cpp
module speech:spanish;

const char* get_phrase_es() {
    return "¡Hola Mundo!";
}
```

This looks similar to before, but has a few changes:

- The `import` of the partitions in the primary interface unit no longer has
  the `export` keyword.
- The `module` declarations in the partitions are also missing the `export`
  keyword. This makes the partitions *implementation* partitions.
- The functions are defined in the implementation units without the `export`
  keyword. Their exported-ness is not relevant in the implementation units.
- The functions are *declared* in the primary interface unit with the `export`
  keyword. This makes the functions part of the module interface, even if not
  defined.

This is analogous to having a header file that declares two functions and two
source files that define those functions. Changes to the implementation units
do not effect the interface, and there is no way to modify the module interface
by making changes to the implementation units.

I've been thinking about it, and it doesn't seem like we have too much code to
divide up into multiple files. Still, I'd like to be able to save on
incremental build times when I only modify the implementation. Can I do that
without partitions? Yes!

```c++
// speech.cpp
export module speech;

export const char* get_phrase_en();
export const char* get_phrase_es();
```

```c++
// speech_impl.cpp
module speech;

const char* get_phrase_en() {
    return "Hello, world!";
}

const char* get_phrase_es() {
    return "¡Hola Mundo!";
}
```

The partition syntax has disappeared, and we only have two source files for our
module. The `module speech;` declaration (without `export`) declares that
module unit to be an *implementation unit* (not a partition). There is no way
to import this file separately, nor is there reason to do so. These two files
will be used to create the module `speech`.


## Restrictions on `[export] {import,module}` and Partitions

The token sequence `export import` may look weird at first, but it's meaning is
just what it sounds like: Import the given module, and then export that import
so that downstream importers will also import the same module transitively.

Because of the way they are defined, there are a few important restrictions on
how you can import and export module partitions.


### `export import` is only allowed for interface partitions

The following is not allowed:

```c++
module A:Foo;
```

```c++
export module A;

export import :Foo;  // NO! :Foo is not an interface unit!
```

The reasoning is fairly simple: Because `A:Foo` does not contribute to the
interface of `A`, it is nonsensical to propagate the entities of `A:Foo` to
importers.


### `export module` must appear *once* per module

Suppose we are defining a module `Cats`. In order to define it, we'll need at least one module interface unit that is not a partition of `Cats`.

```c++
export module Cats;

export void meow();
export void purr();
```

What happens if we add another module unit that extends `Cats`?

```c++
export module Cats;

export void hiss();
```

Not allowed! The `export module` without a partition name is the *primary*
interface unit, and there can only be one.

The current nature of compilers could not cope with such a design. Two compiler
invocations would be unable to know if these should be "merged," or if you've
very quickly rewritten and moved the definition of `Cats` to another file. A
compiler could theoretically see both files simultaneously and do the merge,
but then you have questions about how the two files interact. Supporting such a
design would be very complex with little benefit.

Additionally, supporting multiple primary interface units raises another
question: What stops a user from injecting things into someone else's module by
defining another `Cats` file?


### `export` is not allowed in implementation units

This one is self-explanatory. Allowing an implementation unit to export an
entity (or module import) is senseless.


### All interface partitions *must* be re-exported from the primary interface unit

Because an interface partition may extend the interface of a module (i.e.
introduce entities not declared in the primary interface unit), it is essential
that a compiler be able to see the entirety of a module's interface just by
looking into the primary interface unit.

```c++
export module Cats:Sounds;

export void meow();
export void hiss();
```

```c++
export module Cats:Behaviors;

export void eat();
export void sleep();
```

```c++
export module Cats;

export import :Sounds;
```

```c++
// importer.cpp
import Cats;

void foo() {
    meow(); // Okay
    hiss(); // Okay
    eat();  // Er...
}
```

`importer.cpp` uses `eat`, and `eat` is defined with `export` in an interface partition, but how is the compiler supposed to know that `eat` is a member of `Cats`? The primary `Cats` unit does not export-import `:Behaviors`!

The program above is *ill-formed*, **no diagnostic required**! NDR is one of the most frightening terms in the C++ standard. If often means *undefined behavior*.

However: You can reasonably expect that this issue will most often result in a compile error, as the definition of `eat` is not visible. It may simply be unclear *why* `eat` is not visible when you can clearly see `export void eat();` defined in `export module Cats:Behaviors`. So you'll most likely see a diagnostic, just not a diagnostic related to the missing re-export.


### Module implementation units are spooky beasts

One can define a module interface and implementation in separate files without the need for partitions. The may be unintuitive, but is perfectly reasonable upon inspection.

```c++
export module Cats;

export void dream();
export void sleep();
```

```c++
// cats_sleep.cpp
module Cats;

import sleep_info;

void sleep() {
    if (is_rem_sleep()) {
        dream();
    }
}
```

In the above, `cats_sleep.cpp` is an implementation unit for `Cats`. The
primary interface unit makes no mention of it, so you might expect this to be
an issue. What's going on?

The answer is that the `Cats` interface unit contains sufficient information
that downstream users can import and use the module successfully. They need not
see the implementation of `sleep` and `dream`, so there is no need to mention
where it is defined. It can be assumed that the definitions will be resolved by
the linker.

Another thing you may notice: `cats_sleep.cpp` calls `dream`, but we never
import or declare it! This is perfectly fine: non-partition module
implementation units implicitly import the module of which they are a member.
Since there is no way for the interface to import this anonymous implementation
unit, there is no risk of cyclic imports.

This begs a question: Why make a module implementation partition at all? You
could just make anonymous implementation units instead, right?

Not always. Even though the entities in implementation units are not visible to
importers, they *are* visible to other members of the module as long as they
are imported. This is one possible way you might use PIMPL with modules (and
before you ask: There are still good reasons to use PIMPL with C++ modules)

```c++
module Gadgets:PrivWidget;

struct PrivWidget {
    // ...
};
```

```c++
export module Gadgets;

import :PrivWidget;

export class Widget {
    std::unique_ptr<PrivWidget> _data;
    // ...
};

export Widget get_widget() {
    auto priv = std::make_unique<PrivWidget>(1, 2, 3);
    return Widget{std::move(priv)};
}
```


# Enough for Now

C++ modules are a huge change. To discuss every aspect of them will take more
than a single post. We've covered the bare basics, but there is so much more to
discuss.

Watch this space for follow-ups!
