---
layout: post
title: >
    A Buffers Library for C++20: Part 1
desc: In which I talk about buffer-oriented operations in a new decade of C++
---

In this modern day and age of high-falutin' fancy-pantsy things like C++ Ranges,
C++ Coroutines, C++ Modules, and this newfangled "rap music" that all the kids
are into, we mustn't forget our roots: The humble `memcpy` and `void*`!

After all, isn't most of programming just copying bytes around? It's been many
decades since `void*` was introduced, but is it the best we can do?


# "If you wish to make an apple pie from scratch,"

> ... you must first create `memcpy`!

In my work on `dds`, I've been reinventing many wheels, although I've
successfully made use of some existing code, and drew a lot of inspiration from
others.

Amongst the libraries I've been working on, I eventually needed a library that
dealt with byte sequences: One of the lowest-level objects you'll ever deal with
while writing code. This sounds pretty silly, right? We have `void*`,
`std::memcpy`, `read()`, and `write()`. What more could we possibly need?

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
This was originally going to be a one-off post, but it ended up exploding in
size enough that it was too large for a single blog post (even by my standards)!
This will be the first in a series about building a C++20 buffer-handling
library.
</div>


## Drawing Inspiration: Asio

Amongst C++'s most famous libraries is *Asio* (often used in the Boost variant).
Beyond being famous, it is also *infamous*. It gets both a lot of *love* and a
lot of *hate*, but what I see less frequently discussed is what I believe to be
one of its hidden gems: It's buffer APIs.

Asio is an old library, long predating many of the niceties of "modern C++," so
certain aspects of the codebase didn't age as well as the others. As for the
buffer APIs, I believe they are some of its best components, and I think they
should be given serious consideration outside of any I/O related functionality.
They are *so useful*, that I found it worthwhile to rebuild them from scratch
with full C++20 support with several tweaks and extensions.


# From the Bottom-Up: `neo-buffer`

Many of the new libraries I've been creating live in the `neo` namespace, my own
humble attempt at building high-quality generic code upon our new-and-improved
language. Amongst these is `neo-buffer`, my re-implementation of much of Asio's
buffer-oriented APIs, along with several extensions and tweaks that I hope we
can find useful.

These posts will also outline some of my in-depth explorations into working with
C++20's *Concepts*. Asio also provides "concepts" for its APIs, but they
pre-date the language feature and have not yet been implemented as real
`concept`s in the Asio codebase. These posts will explore what similar `concept`
definitions might look like and what kinds of algorithms, types, and utilities
we can build on top of them.

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
Like this post itself, `neo-buffer` grew far beyond what I initially expected.
I've been building the library as-if I intend to propose it for standardization.
I can't be sure that it's something I *will* propose, but I'm hoping to have
given enough rigor and care that it can be worthy of being a default-shipping
component. I need more eyes on it than it has received so far, but I hope others
will find the APIs and idioms useful.
</div>


# A nominal concept: "buffer"

To start, lets define a "buffer" to be a **sized** and **non-owning** reference
to a contiguous sequence of bytes in memory. I choose to use `std::byte`
specifically, because it imposes no semantics, is allowed to alias other types,
and makes casts explicit. Unlike `char` (and variants), it does not implicitly
convert, does not provide arithmetic operations, and has a meaningful name.
(We're still able to perform bitwise operations on a `std::byte`, though.)

The choice of `std::byte` differs from Asio's choice to use `void*` for its
buffer types. (Asio long predates `std::byte`, so that choice was not even
available.)


# Pointers to `std::byte`

Let's ask a question: What is *safe* to view and manipulate through aliasing
pointers through `std::byte`?

If we have an object of type `T` that we wish to persist by writing its *object
representation* bytes into a stream, and then later we wish to restore it by
reading those bytes from the stream into the *object representation* of a `T`,
with the expectation that `T` is equivalent before and after (with no undefined
behavior, of course), what would be the requirements on `T`?

The answer is that `T` must be
[*TriviallyCopyable*](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TriviallyCopyable).
This is a "named requirement," which are just old-skool versions of concepts
from before we had them as a language feature. C++20 won't include a `concept`
to represent this, but we can make do by writing one ourselves based on the
specification of *TriviallyCopyable*:

```c++
template <typename T>
concept trivially_copyable =
  std::copyable<T> &&
  std::is_trivially_copyable_v<T>;
```

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
Astute readers will note that this differs
*slightly* from `TriviallyCopyable` in that it rejects C-style arrays, which do
not satisfy `copyable`. While we could permit `trivially_copyable` to accept
arrays, this would prevent `trivially_copyable` from refining `copyable`, which
intuition tells us to expect.
</div>


## A real `concept`: `buffer_safe`

We can say that a type is "buffer safe" if it is `trivially_copyable`. For our
purposes, we can extend this to include C-style arrays of `trivially_copyable`
types as well. Thus, we can define our `buffer_safe` concept:

```c++
template <typename T>
concept buffer_safe =
  trivially_copyable<T>
  || (std::is_array_v<T> && trivially_copyable<std::remove_all_extents_t<T>>);
```

**Note:** Even if a type is *buffer safe*, that does not mean it is *buffer
sensible*. For example, manipulating class types through their object
representation when those classes have pointer data members, although "safe", is
rarely desired, and we wouldn't want to write a pointer to disk and then read it
back later if the memory mappings of the program may have changed in the
interim. I've been unable to determine a good way to mechanically detect whether
a type is "buffer sensible," so we must rely on some amount of programmer
intuition and make things *explicit* rather than *implicit*.


## Our First Function: `byte_pointer`

With our first `concept` defined, let's define our first function: a glorified
explicit cast:

```c++
auto byte_pointer(buffer_safe auto* ptr) {
  auto void_ptr = static_cast<void*>(ptr);
  return static_cast<std::byte*>(void_ptr);
}

auto byte_pointer(buffer_safe auto const* ptr) {
  auto void_ptr = static_cast<const void*>(ptr);
  return static_cast<const std::byte*>(void_ptr);
}
```

~~(The `static_cast`-dance is to satisfy constraints on `constexpr`, as a single
`reinterpret_cast` is not allowed.)~~

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
**EDIT:** ``byte_pointer`` cannot be ``constexpr``, as the `static_cast` from
`void*` is by-definition not possibly a constant expression.

For brevity, I have omitted `constexpr` and `noexcept` from all code samples,
but most of the code in this post is otherwise `noexcept` and `constexpr` ready.
</div>

With this, we can define a similar function that takes the address of an object:

```c++
template <typename T>
  requires buffer_safe<std::remove_cvref_t<T>>
auto byte_addressof(T&& obj) {
  return byte_pointer(std::addressof(obj));
}
```

Asio doesn't have a `byte_pointer` function, so why do *we* want one? A few
reasons:

1. Inherently, manipulating objects through aliased pointers is risky business,
   and we want to be *loud* and *noticable* when we do it. You can find anywhere
   in your codebase that you are doing it by searching for `byte_pointer` or
   `byte_addressof`, whereas searching for another cast expression will be a bit
   less obvious. In the case of implicit casting to `void*`, it is likely
   invisible!
2. In order to satisfy `constexpr`, we need to do the double-cast. If we had to
   do this *everywhere* we would make quite a mess.
3. `byte_pointer` restricts itself to types that are `buffer_safe`. If you were
   to attempt to form a pointer-to-`std::byte` for a non-trivial object via a
   traditional `reinterpret_cast`, the compiler would happily let you do so,
   possibly to your own demise. With `byte_pointer`, we get an immediate
   diagnostic when we attempt those kinds of shenanigans. If you *really* wanted
   to do that unsafe cast, you can always break out the `reinterpret_cast`.

Another note on the choice of `std::byte*` over `void*`: Using `void*` allows
implicit casting to occur whenever we attempt to form a buffer to alias an
object for which it may be unsafe to do so. We can gain additional compile-time
safety and clearer semantics by making these casts explicit.


# Concrete Types: `const_buffer` and `mutable_buffer`

Asio defines two low-level types to represent buffers: `const_buffer` and
`mutable_buffer`, and their names do just what they say on the tin:

- `const_buffer` is a *read-only* view of a contiguous segment of memory. We use
  it as the source of data for buffer-oriented operations.
- `mutable_buffer` is a *writeable* (and *readable*) reference to contiguous
  segment of memory. We use it as the destination of data for buffer-oriented
  operations.

<div class="aside note" markdown="1">
I know what you're probably thinking: "Vector, what about `std::span`?"

Span is great. Span is cool. It lets us do some neat things with contiguous
pieces of memory. However, when we know that we're dealing with arrays of bytes,
it helps to use a more specialized abstraction. The additional genericity of
`std::span` is not as useful for buffer-oriented operations as the utility of
types dedicated to the task. For buffers, some of `std::span`'s features don't
make sense. In other cases, we want features that are not available in
`std::span`.
</div>

The `neo-buffer` versions of `const_buffer` and `mutable_buffer` are a little
different. Instead of storing `void*`, our version stores `std::byte*`.
Additionally, we can easily add a few convenience APIs thanks to C++ Concepts.

If there's one thing we've learned from many years in C++, implicit casts are
tools of the devil to sneak subtle bugs into your code at every pass. **Except**
for *one* cast that we rely one at every corner: `T* -> const T*` and
`T& -> const T&`. Adding `const` to a reference is intuitive and safe. Casts in
the other direction are spooky and dangerous, and must be done through the
terrifying `const_cast`.

`mutable_buffer` and `const_buffer` share the same relationship: Implicit casts
from `mutable_buffer` to `const_buffer` are implicit and safe, but casts in the
other direction are forbidden.

These basis buffer types are themselves very simple. They encompass a *pointer*
to some bytes and a *size* of the contiguous memory that they reference. The
types have a few fundamental operations and member functions:

```c++
// The constructors:
const_buffer::const_buffer(const std::byte* p, size_type size);
mutable_buffer::mutable_buffer(std::byte* p, size_type size);

int integer = 42;
// Create a readonly view of the representation of `integer`
auto cbuf = const_buffer(byte_addressof(integer), sizeof integer);
// Create a writeable view of the representation of `integer`
auto mbuf = mutable_buffer(byte_addressof(integer), sizeof integer);

// Get the pointers to the data:
std::byte const* const_ptr = cbuf.data();
std::byte*       mut_ptr   = mbuf.data();

// Get the sizes of the buffers
auto cbuf_size = cbuf.size();
auto mbuf_size = mbuf.size();
```

A few fun facts about these types:

- The buffer types are *semiregular*: They can be default-constructed (In
  which case they have a `size() == 0`), copied, and assigned.
- The buffer types are trivially destructible.
- Because this is a central abstraction, we can enable audit checks to
  bounds-check our entire buffer-operating layer.
- They are contextually convertible to `bool`, to check whether they are
  non-empty. This can also be checked with the `.empty()` method.
- They are explicitly convertible to/from `std::span`, `std::basic_string`,
  `std::basic_string_view`, `std::array`, `std::vector`, and many more
  (discussed later).


## Advancing Buffers, and Other Nice Things™

Asio's basic buffer types offer two more very useful APIs on these buffers:

- `*_buffer::operator+=(size_type s)` will advance the internal data pointer by
  `s` bytes, and shrink the size by `s`. This is remarkably useful, as we'll see
  later.
- Non-member `operator+(*_buffer b, size_type s)` just makes a copy of `b` and
  applies `operator+=(s)` to it, and returns that copy.

`neo-buffer` also offers these APIs, and they behave identically. Usage is
simple:

```c++
// Write all of the data in `b` into `f`.
void write_all(std::FILE* f, neo::const_buffer b) {
  // Keep writing until the buffer is empty.
  while (b) {
    // Write some data
    auto n_written = std::fwrite(b.data(), 1, b.size(), file);
    // Advance the buffer by how much we have written
    b += n_written;
    // Check that the write actually wrote anything
    if (n_written == 0) {
      throw std::runtime_error("writing the file failed!");
    }
  }
}
```

Those allergic to operator overloading will be happy to hear that `neo-buffer`
also offers `remove_prefix(size_type)`, which performs the same operation. In
fact, the buffer types offer several APIs from `std::span`, along with a few
others:

- `empty()` - Check if `size() == 0`
- `remove_prefix(size_type s)` - Advance over `s` bytes of the underlying
  buffer, shrinking `size()` as appropriate.
- `remove_suffix(size_type s)` - Decrease `size()` by `s` (There is no
  overloaded operator counterpart, as this is less often needed).
- `operator[](size_type s)` - Get a reference to the `std::byte` at offset `s`
  from the beginning of the buffer.
- `first(size_type s)` - Obtain a new buffer that references the first `s` bytes
  of `this`.
- `last(size_type s)` - Obtain a new buffer that references the last `s` bytes
  of `this`.
- `split(size_type part)` - Obtain two new buffers, as-if by `first(part)` and
  `last(size() - part)`.
- `equals_string(...)` - Magic! Discussed later.
- `explicit operator T()` - More magic! Discussed later.


# Convenience Casts

I promised that this post would focus on C++ Concepts. So far we haven't done
much, but we're about to really get into it.

Writing expressive generic code that can Do The Right Thing™ in the face of an
infinite space of types has been very difficult. In a world where SFINAE-abuse
has been our only mechanism of controlling overload sets, code that does tricks
with it can quickly become inscrutable (not to mention the error messages).

One of the coolest but scariest things we can do in C++ is define conversions
between types. Again, we have been bitten repeatedly by implicit casts, and we
wish to avoid them as much as possible. *Explicit* casts, on the other hand, are
more enticing.

Suppose I wish to support "convenience casts" on the buffer types, much like we
have "convenience functions." Sometimes *less* is *more*, as long as our
intentions are clear (thus we want *explicit* casts, not *implicit* ones).

Suppose one case: I want it to be possible to construct a `const_buffer` from an
arbitrary type for which the semantics of such a conversion is obvious. How
would I define such a conversion constructor?

```c++
template <typename T>
explicit const_buffer(T&& thing) { ??? }
```

The above is obviously no good: It will eat everything! When the compiler
performs overload resolution on the constructor set of the buffer types, we want
to throw out this constructor when it is not applicable. We need to apply a
*constraint* on `T`.


## Finding Good Constraints

To define a concept, we should avoid starting with the constraints and designing
types to satisfy them. Instead, we should look at existing types that do what we
want and extract the concepts from the syntax and semantics that those types
provide.

To define this conversion, let's start with a type for which I *know* I want
this conversion to be possible: `std::string`. I want it to be possible to
construct a `const_buffer cb` from a `std::string str`, where the resulting
buffer will have `cb.data() == str.data()` and `cb.size() == str.size()`.

How could I define such a conversion? It is fairly simple to write it in terms
of a delegating constructor:

```c++
explicit const_buffer(const std::string& str)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(str.data()),
                 str.size())
  {}
```

We simply convert the string's `.data()` pointer into a pointer to `std::byte`,
and form a buffer with the same size as that string.


### Generalize

`std::string` is only a single specialization of `std::basic_string`. What about
`wstring`, `u16string`, `u32string`, or `u8string`? We can *convert* our
*converting constructor* into a template over `basic_string`:

```c++
template <typename Char,
          typename Traits,
          typename Allocator>
explicit const_buffer(const std::basic_string<Char, Traits, Allocator>& str)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(str.data()),
                 str.size() * sizeof(Char))
  {}
```

This is similar to the previous, but we must multiply the size of the buffer by
the size of the character type, since a `wstring` of size `N` consumes
`N * sizeof(wchar_t)` bytes.

This looks pretty good, but has a hiccup: Suppose some maniac passes a `Char`
type that is not `buffer_safe`! In that case, the `byte_pointer(str.data())`
call will be invalid, and the constructor will become ill-formed but still
remain in the overload set. We need to constrain it further:

```c++
template <buffer_safe Char,
          typename    Traits,
          typename    Allocator>
explicit const_buffer(const std::basic_string<Char, Traits, Allocator>& str)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(str.data()),
                 str.size() * sizeof(Char))
  {}
```

(Note the constraint on the `Char` template parameter.)


## `std::vector` is neato burrito.

`std::vector` guarantees contiguous layout of its elements. We should also
support that one. Such a converting constructor looks markedly similar to the
conversion for `basic_string`:

```c++
template <buffer_safe T, typename Alloc>
explicit const_buffer(const std::vector<T, Alloc>& vec)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(vec.data()),
                 vec.size() * sizeof(T))
  {}
```

Yeah, I'd say `std::vector` is pretty cool. But you know what *isn't* cool?
~~Me~~ `vector<bool>`. This converting constructor, even with its
`buffer_safe T` protection, will be ill-formed (but still appear in the overload
set) when given `vector<bool>` because that type has no `.data()` method!

We need to prevent `vector<bool>` from appearing. How could we do that?

```c++
template <buffer_safe T, typename Alloc>
  requires !std::same_as<T, bool>
explicit const_buffer(const std::vector<T, Alloc>& vec)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(vec.data()),
                 vec.size() * sizeof(T))
  {}
```

That may be tempting, but remember that we don't want to define our constraints
against specific types, but rather the semantics they have in common. What we
*really* want is to require that there be a `.data()` method:

```c++
template <typename T>
concept has_data_method =
  requires(T t) {
    t.data();
  };

/// ...

template <buffer_safe T, typename Alloc>
  requires has_data_method<std::vector<T, Alloc>>
explicit const_buffer(const std::vector<T, Alloc>& vec)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(vec.data()),
                 vec.size() * sizeof(T))
  {}
```

This `has_data_method` is actually a *bad* concept, but we're getting a bit
closer to defining a *good* concept.


## `std::array` is the bee's knees.

Supporting `std::array` will be nice. Let's define a constructor for that:

```c++
template <buffer_safe T, size_t N>
explicit const_buffer(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(arr.data()),
                 arr.size() * sizeof(T))
  {}
```

Wow... that looks... almost identical to the `std::vector` version. We should
now be noticing a pattern.


## `std::span` is the cat's pyjamas.

How 'bout `std::span`?

```c++
template <buffer_safe T, size_t E>
explicit const_buffer(const std::span<T, E>& sp)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(sp.data()),
                 sp.size() * sizeof(T))
  {}
```

Hmm...


## `std::basic_string_view` is A Very Good Thing™.

```c++
template <buffer_safe Char, typename Traits>
explicit const_buffer(std::basic_string_view<Char, Traits>& sv)
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(sv.data()),
                 sv.size() * sizeof(Char))
  {}
```


# Defining a Concept

Remember our `has_data_method` Very Bad Concept? It's a hint at a more useful
construct trying to break out.

In all of the above cases, we also asked for the `.size()` of the parameter.
This is something that containers have in common. It's so common, in fact, that
a standard library function was added to extend support for it to C-arrays:
`std::size`. What if we want a concept that represents ranges that also know
their size? Well, we have one: `std::ranges::sized_range`.

What about that `.data()` method? Do we have one of those concepts? Yes:
`std::ranges::contiguous_range`!

It looks like C++20 will be giving us most of what we need to write a good
conversion function, but we'll also need some other APIs that aren't part of
`<ranges>`.

Now we're ready to declare our new concept. For `neo-buffer`, I've tentatively
named this concept `trivial_range`. A more descriptive name may be
`buffer_safe_sized_contiguous_range`, but that's quite a mouthful.

It may be tempting to immediately define our new concept based on the standard
library's concepts:

```c++
// No good:
template <typename T>
concept trivial_range =
  ranges::contiguous_range<T> &&
  ranges::sized_range<T>;
```

but there is actually a bit more that we need. Note that the above definition
will match `std::vector<std::string>`, but we *do not* want to form a buffer
from that type, because `std::string` is not safe to manipulate through
`std::byte*`. We need to constrain the range type `T` further.


## Create a Basis

We can now define our new range type, which is a refinement of `contiuous_range`
and `sized_range`:

```c++
// Better!
template <typename T>
concept trivial_range =
  ranges::contiguous_range<T> &&
  ranges::sized_range<T> &&
  // The range's data type should be buffer_safe.
  buffer_safe<ranges::range_value_t<T>>;
```


## Add Further Refinements

The above concept will match a range regardless of the `const`-ness of its
referred-to elements. It is safe to view a mutable range through a
`const_buffer`, but not the other way around. For this reason, we may want to
constrain a type to only match if the range provides a mutable view of its
content, such as (non-`const`) `std::string`.

```c++
template <typename C>
concept mutable_trivial_range =
  // A `mutable_trivial_range` is
  // also a plain `trivial_range`
  trivial_range<C> &&
  requires (range_reference_t<C> ref) {
    // The byte_pointer type *must* be a
    // pointer to non-const `std::byte`
    { neo::byte_addressof(ref) }
      -> same_as<std::byte*>;
  };
```

For `mutable_trivial_range`, the result of `byte_addressof` must be *exactly*
`std::byte*`. If the type is `const std::byte*`, we know that the range's
references do not allow modification through them.


## Getting the byte-size of a range

You'll notice that in our converting constructors, we multiplied the `.size()`
by the size of the elements. This is a common operation enough to give it its
own function:

```c++
size_t range_size_bytes(const trivial_range auto& c) {
  return ranges::size(c) * sizeof(ranges::range_value_t<decltype(c)>);
}
```


## Applying the Concept

We can now throw away our half-dozen overloads of a converting constructor for a
few types and replace it with a generic one that can support a world of types
that we haven't even imagined yet:

```c++
const_buffer(trivial_range auto&& c) noexcept
  : const_buffer(byte_pointer(ranges::data(c)),
                 range_size_bytes(c))
  {}
```

For `mutable_buffer`, we need to use our other concept that handles the case of
mutable ranges:

```c++
mutable_buffer(mutable_trivial_range auto&& c) noexcept
  : mutable_buffer(byte_pointer(ranges::data(c)),
                   range_size_bytes(c))
  {}
```


## `const`-correctness

When defining a concept, it is *absolutely necessary* that you take
`const`-correctness into account. For `trivial_range`, we need to consider how
we want to propagate `const`-ness.

For example, `std::string_view`'s `.data()` is *always* a pointer-to-`const`,
regardless of whether the `string_view` itself is const or not. This is why this
is known as a "view".

On the other hand, `std::span<T>` for non-const `T` will *never* have a
pointer-to-`const` for its `.data()`. (Also known as "shallow-const".)

In the case of `std::string`, `std::vector`, and `std::array`, they propagate
their `const`-ness down in their `.data()` methods. (Also known as
"deep-const".)

Suppose the following snippet:

```c++
void frombulate(trivial_range auto&&); // [1]
void frombulate(mutable_trivial_range auto&&); // [2]

void do_stuff(trivial_range auto&& c) {
  frombulate(c);
}
```

Which version of `frombulate` will be called by `do_stuff`? Don't make the
mistake to assume that it will be `[1]` unconditionally! While `c` is
constrained to meet `trivial_range`, the actual type of `c` *could also* meet
`mutable_trivial_range`.

When `c` meets `mutable_trivial_range`, both overloads `[1]` and `[2]` will be
valid candidates for overload resolution. However, by the rules of constraint
refinement, overload `[2]` is *more constrained* than `[1]`, and is ruled to be
a better match.

If I pass `const std::string` to `do_stuff`, then the result of `.data()` will
come out as `const char*`, and the overload of `byte_pointer` will be chosen
which returns `const std::byte*`. Thus `c` *does not* meet
`mutable_trivial_range`, and `frombulate [1]` is selected

If I pass `std::string`, `.data()` becomes `char*`, and `byte_pointer` returns
`std::byte*`. This meets `mutable_trivial_range`, and `frombulate [2]` is
selected.


# Creating a Customization Point

C++20's Ranges comes with several *customization-point objects*. These are
special callable objects that make it easier to implement customization points
than the old method of relying on ADL or template specializations.
Unfortunately, creating a customization point object can be tricky, especially
as it sits on a boundary where current C++ implementations have bugs and
diverging behavior.

Suppose that we want a customization-point that allows a user to provide a
conversion of an object to a `const_buffer` or `mutable_buffer`. For our
purposes, we'll use the apt name "`as_buffer`".

A customization-point object is just that: *an object*. More precisely, it is an
*invocable* object that will be used as if it were a regular function, but its
sole purpose is to enforce constraints and, if applicable, delegate to
user-provided functions that implement the customized version of that API. Let's
start with the basics:

```c++
inline namespace cpo_detail {
  constexpr inline struct as_buffer_fn {

  } as_buffer;
}
```

There is now an object `as_buffer` of the type defined in the `cpo_detail`
namespace. The actual type of the CPO is of little interest to the user, but we
*do* want the user to be able to copy and pass around the customization point as
an object.

Our customization point is not yet invocable, so we should decide how it is
"customized."

The current standard library's customization points follow a similar pattern,
and we can echo that with `as_buffer`:

1. Search for a member function on the object with the same name as the
   customization point.
2. Search for a free function that is visible through ADL.
3. If neither, and the type meets sufficient requirements, perform a base
   implementation.
4. If none of the above, the invocation is ill-formed.

We need to define an `operator()` for our customization point, and we need to
constrain it so that it becomes non-viable if none of the requirements are met.

For each possible expression, we'll define very basic concepts to match it
(these *are not* part of the public API and are only used as part of the
customization point).

```c++
template <typename T>
concept has_member_as_buffer =
  requires (T t) {
    { t.as_buffer() }
      -> std::convertible_to<const_buffer>;
  };

template <typename T>
concept has_adl_as_buffer =
  requires (T t) {
    { as_buffer(t) }
      -> std::convertible_to<const_buffer>;
  };

template <typename T>
concept as_buffer_check =
     has_member_as_buffer<T>
  || has_adl_as_buffer<T>
  || std::constructible_from<const_buffer, T>
  || std::constructible_from<mutable_buffer, T>;
```

We can now define a constrained `operator()`:

```c++
struct as_buffer_fn{
  template <as_buffer_check T>
  auto operator()(T&& item) const {
    // 1: Prefer a member .as_buffer()
    if constexpr (has_as_buffer_member<T>) {
      return forward<T>(item).as_buffer();
    }
    // 2: Prefer next an ADL as_buffer(t)
    else if constexpr (has_adl_as_buffer<T>) {
      return as_buffer(forward<T>(item));
    }
    // 3: Next, prefer a conversion to mutable_buffer
    else if constexpr (std::constructible_from<mutable_buffer, T>) {
      return mutable_buffer(forward<T>(item));
    }
    // 4: None of the other options match, so assume we
    //    can convert to const_buffer
    else {
      return const_buffer(forward<T>(item));
    }
  }
};
```

The chain of `constexpr if-else`s will select *the first* of the matching
customization expressions, so we are safe if more than one of the possible
expressions is actually valid (We can "prefer" a member `as_buffer` to an ADL
`as_buffer`).

Because of our prior explicit conversions, `as_buffer` will now accept any
`trivial_range` as well:

```c++
std::string s;
auto buf = as_buffer(s);  // Okay!
```

This has an additional benefit: Suppose that we *don't know* which of the two
buffer types we actually want? What if our choice of
`const_buffer`/`mutable_buffer` depends on the const-ness of the range? Well now
we can simply use `as_buffer()` and get the correct type without fretting over
it:

```c++
std::string_view     sview;
std::string          str;
std::vector<int>     vec;
std::span<int>       span;
std::span<const int> c_span;

// Always-const, because it is a view
as_buffer(sview)
  -> const_buffer;

// Deeply-const
as_buffer(str)
  -> mutable_buffer;
as_buffer(as_const(str))
  -> const_buffer;

// Same
as_buffer(vec)
  -> mutable_buffer;
as_buffer(as_const(vec))
  -> const_buffer;

// Shallow-const, so always mutable
as_buffer(span)
  -> mutable_buffer;
as_buffer(as_const(span))
  -> mutable_buffer;

// A span-of-const is a view
as_buffer(c_span)
  -> const_buffer;
```

## Buffer Size Clamping

Another common operation is to "clamp" the size of a buffer that we might not
know. That is, if given a buffer `b` of size `N`, but we can only operate on `M`
bytes *at most*, we need to get a new buffer that refers to the same bytes as
`b`, but is the shorter of `N` and `M`.

`as_buffer`, as a utility to create buffers from existing objects, is a good
candidate to perform such an operation:

```c++
struct as_buffer_fn {
  template <as_buffer_check T>
  auto operator()(T&& item) const { /* ... */ }

  template <as_buffer_check T>
  auto operator()(T&& item, size_t max_size) const {
    // Use our main `operator()` to get the initial buffer
    auto buf = (*this)(item);
    if (buf.size() > max_size) {
      // Shrink the buffer to the first `max_size` bytes:
      buf = buf.first(max_size);
    }
    return buf;
  }
};
```


## Buffers from Pointers

Similar to the problem of unknown `const`-ness on ranges, we may have a pointer
to `std::byte` (of unknown `const`-ness), and a size_t of the buffer, so how do
we know whether to create a `const_buffer` or a `mutable_buffer`? We could check
the type inline, or we could delegate that responsibility to our `as_buffer`:

```c++
struct as_buffer_fn {
  // ...

  const_buffer operator()(const std::byte* ptr, size_t size) const {
    return const_buffer(ptr, size);
  }

  mutable_buffer operator()(std::byte* ptr, size_t size) const {
    return mutable_buffer(ptr, size);
  }
};
```

With these, our `as_buffer` becomes a one-stop-shop for generating buffers from
"buffer-able" objects, be they ranges, byte pointers, or any type that provides
an `as_buffer`.


# Another Utility: Buffers to Trivial Objects

We're set up to create buffers from contiguous ranges of `buffer_safe` objects,
but what if we just want to create a buffer for a single object? We can do that
pretty easily:

```c++
int value = 42;
auto buf = const_buffer(byte_addressof(value), sizeof value);
```

This is an incredibly common operation. It's common enough to warrant a utility
function:

```c++
auto trivial_buffer(buffer_safe auto&& obj) {
  auto ptr = byte_addressof(obj);
  auto size = sizeof obj;
  return as_buffer(ptr, size);
}
```

Because `trivial_buffer` uses `byte_addressof` and `as_buffer`, it also behaves
correctly in preserving `const`-ness of its argument:

```c++
int i = 42;
const int ci = 1729;

trivial_buffer(i)
  -> mutable_buffer;

trivial_buffer(ci)
  -> const_buffer;
```

Later on, we'll see why `trivial_buffer` can be more useful than meets the eye.


# Our First Buffer-Algorithm: `buffer_copy`

At the beginning, I teased that we would be re-inventing `std::memcpy`. Well,
here it comes.

`buffer_copy` is probably the most fundamental of all buffer-oriented
algorithms, and one of the most fundamental operations in all of computing. It's
semantically equivalent `memcpy`, but we can do some tricks that improve over
`memcpy`, including automatic bounds and `nullptr` checks. Here's a simple
definition:

```c++
size_t buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest, const_buffer source) {
  const size_t n_copy = min(dest.size(), source.size());
  if (n_copy) {
    memcpy(dest.data(), source.data(), n_copy);
  }
  return n_copy;
}
```

This looks alright, but it has some downsides:

1. `std::memcpy` is not `constexpr`, so this definition of `buffer_copy` cannot
   be `constexpr`.
2. `std::memcpy` has the precondition that the source/destination are disjoint.
   This allows the implementation to perform optimized buffer copying, but it
   means that `buffer_copy` is unusable in the case that the caller cannot
   guarantee that the buffers are actually disjoint.
3. The caller cannot limit the number of bytes copied.
4. The caller cannot provide their own copying operation that might be more
   well-tuned than `std::memcpy` (It could happen!)
5. We branch on `n_copy`, since calling `memcpy` with a `nullptr` is undefined
   behavior, and we may have been given an empty buffer with `.data()` of
   `nullptr`. This can hurt code size and costs cache size in the branch
   predictor.

For (1), we can do enough to branch on `std::is_constant_evaluated()` to perform
a simple byte-wise copy for `constexpr` support.

For (2), we could use `std::memmove`, but this would be a pessimisation if the
caller *knows* that the buffers are disjoint.

In all of the above cases, we can solve the potential issues by providing
additional overloads. Firstly, let's provide a `max_copy` parameter:

```c++
size_t buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest,
                   const_buffer source,
                   size_t max_copy) {
  const size_t n_copy = min(max_copy, min(dest.size(), source.size()));
  // ...
  return n_copy;
}

// An overload that fills in `max_copy` for us:
size_t buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest, mutable_buffer source) {
  return buffer_copy(dest, source, numeric_limits<size_t>::max());
}
```

This will allow the caller to limit the number of bytes copied regardless of the
buffer sizes.

## Low-Level Copying

Previously, we unconditionally called `memcpy` to copy our bytes, but it presents a few limitations. It would be nice if we could present the user options to replace how we do this operation. Of course, let's `concept`-ify `memcpy`:

```c++
template <typename Fn>
concept bytewise_copy_func =
  invocable<Fn, byte*, const byte*, size_t>;
```

Now let's provide our `constexpr` variants of `memcpy` that "do the right
thing":

```c++
constexpr void bytewise_copy_forwards(byte* out, byte* in, size_t n) {
  for (; n; --n) {
    *out++ = *in++;
  }
}

constexpr void bytewise_copy_backwards(byte* out, byte* in, size_t n) {
  auto d = out + n;
  auto s = in + n;
  for (; n; --n) {
    *--d = *--s;
  }
}

constexpr void bytewise_copy_safe(byte* out, byte* in, size_t n) {
  if (std::less<>{}(out, in)) {
    bytewise_copy_forwards(out, in, n);
  } else {
    bytewise_copy_backwards(out, in, n);
  }
}
```

Now, let's put our low-level copy function into `buffer_copy`:

```c++
/**
 * Base implementation:
 */
constexpr
size_t buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest,
                   const_buffer src,
                   size_t max_copy,
                   bytewise_copy_func auto copy) {
  const auto n_copy = min(max_copy, min(dest.size(), src.size()));
  copy(dest.data(), src.data(), n_copy);
  return n_copy;
}

// Convenience overloads:
/**
 * Given a dest, src, and max size:
 */
constexpr size_t
buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest,
            const_buffer src,
            size_t max_copy) {
  // Default to using the safe-copy function:
  return buffer_copy(dest, src, max_copy, &bytewise_copy_safe);
}

/**
 * Given a dest, src, and a low-level byte copy function:
 */
constexpr size_t
buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest,
            const_buffer src,
            bytewise_copy_func auto copy) {
  // Call the base version with the maximum size_t
  return buffer_copy(dest, src, numeric_limits<size_t>::max(), copy);
}

/**
 * Given a dest and a source only:
 */
constexpr size_t
buffer_copy(mutable_buffer dest, const_buffer src) {
  return buffer_copy(dest,
                     src,
                     numeric_limits<size_t>::max(),
                     &bytewise_copy_safe);
}
```

And now we have our base `buffer_copy` algorithm.


## Wild Overkill?

I can hear a lot of readers scratching there head at the above. This is
completely overkill, right? Can't we can just call `memcpy` and be done with
it?

In the simplest of cases: *Yes*.

It isn't yet obvious why one would want a `buffer_copy` algorithm, but in the
next posts we'll be expanding our buffer-vocabulary, and `memcpy` will no longer
be sufficient.


# Wrapping Up Part 1

I initially planned on creating only a single monolithic post about a buffers
library, but it quickly exploded in size. This post *itself* is very long, and
there's still so many things I want to cover:

- Buffer ranges
- Buffer tuples
- Buffer range consumers
- Other buffer algorithms
- Dynamic buffer ranges
- Buffer sinks and buffer sources
- Byte-wise iteration
- How this all might fit in the context of a modern input/output library

Alas, these all will have to wait for future installments.
