---
layout: post
title: Using Catch2 v3 in CMake with DDS and PMM
desc: It can be easy
---

When the maintainers of Catch2 announced that the next major version (v3) would
be migrating away from its long-standing header-only approach to distribution,
there was much uproar about how this would hurt adoption and migration. After
all: What can be easier than just dropping a header file in your project and
`#include`-ing it?

To be completely fair to detractors, there's much precedent to be upset about
the idea of a migration from header-only to a compiled library: Building,
distributing, and obtaining libraries in C++ has been a longstanding nightmare
throughout the community. This precedent has been the status quo for far too
long. With [`dds`](https://dds.pizza/) I am working to change that.

So here I'll show a simple demo of how to use Catch2 v3 by dropping a single
file in your CMake project and `include()`-ing it. Other build systems will not
be discussed here, but I hope to have solutions for them in the future as well.


# The Project

Here's my simple CMake project file:

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.15)
project(MyProject)

add_library(my-library stuff.cpp)

add_executable(my-test test.cpp)
target_link_libraries(my-test PRIVATE my-library)
```

Suppose I want to use Catch2 v3 with the `my-test` executable. To do this with
Catch2 v2, one would need to download and correctly place the header file, then
set the proper preprocessor definitions and custom library targets to use it.

In the case of Catch2 v3, [PMM](https://github.com/vector-of-bool/pmm) and `dds`
make it *even more* trivial.


# Adding Catch2 v3 with PMM and `dds`

First, download
[the PMM entrypoint script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vector-of-bool/pmm/master/pmm.cmake)
and save and commit it to your CMake project. With `wget`:

```bash
$ wget "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vector-of-bool/pmm/master/pmm.cmake"
```

or in PowerShell:

```powershell
> iwr "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vector-of-bool/pmm/master/pmm.cmake" `
    -OutFile pmm.cmake
```

Next we `include()` the file in our `CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
include(pmm.cmake)
```

then we utter a small magic `pmm()` incantation:

```cmake
pmm(DDS DEPENDS catch2@3.0.0-preview3)
```

and now we can link Catch2 into our test executable:

```cmake
target_link_libraries(my-test PRIVATE catch2::catch2)
```

and that's all there is to it. With this, can write our tests and use Catch2 as
normal:

```c++
// - test.cpp -

#include <catch2/catch_test_macros.hpp>

#include <my-library.hpp>

TEST_CASE("This is my test case") {
    REQUIRE(my_lib::add_together(3, 5) == 8);
}
```


# That's All for Now

This post will be short and sweet to exemplify what I am really shooting for
with `dds` and PMM, and to emphasize just how simple *I believe* that tooling
*could be*. "Just build everything from source" *can* be viable if we use our
tools to their fullest extent.

I won't detail here how PMM and `dds` do their deeds, but you are always free to
read [the source for PMM](https://github.com/vector-of-bool/pmm) and
[the source for `dds`](https://github.com/vector-of-bool/dds). If there is
sufficient interest in those nitty-gritty details, I may write a follow-up post.

Unfortunately there are a few (temporary) caveats to go along with this: At the
time of writing, `dds` is still in a (seemingly eternal) alpha stage, and the
above example does not yet support providing a custom `main()` (this is a
limitation to the Catch2 package in the `dds` repository, and not due to an
issue in Catch2 or `dds` itself). `dds` is not fully "production-ready", but I
encourage readers to experiment and consider that their tools could be doing
more for them.

Happy coding!
